>> Richard Feldman: Part
two extensible data.
Let's talk about a few things here,
first we're gonna talk about
Constrain Unification which is the process
Elms Compiler uses to
type check everything.
We'll talk about Open versus
Closed Records, we'll talk about why
Open Records Exist, and finally we gonna
talk about Extensible Custom Types.
All right,
let's start with Constrain Unification.
So the way Elms Compiler works is it
basically starts with a series of known
facts about time constraints.
So here are some examples of those.
Stuff is a string literal.
All it says, okay, I just hard coded.
I know what string literals are.
They are all strings.
I know what floats are,
they look like that.
Every time I see that literal,
that's a float.
Every time I see one of these, that is
a list of strings which it knows because
this is a list literal and
this is a string literal.
It also knows that empty list is a list
literal with unbound type variable, so
list of A.
So these are things that her compiler
just knows, they're hard coded,
it doesn't need to do any type inference
to figure them out, it just knows them.
So these are the known facts
that it starts out with and
then it basically goes through your
program and starts inferring new facts, so
here's an example of how it might do that.
Let's say we have this expression,
Hi, my name is ++ name ++!
Okay, this is a string, but
also, I know that's a string.
Here is other string, and
you know that's a string.
++ combines two strings, so
I know that, by influence,
whatever name is, must be a string.
So now let's add those two,
its a list of known fact.
It says, okay, I've used what is known
as constraint unification, to say,
by virtue of what I already know
about these other constraints.
This constraint must be
a string constraint.
That's what the name's type must be.
And as it continues going through
the code it keeps doing this.
So let's say we have
something called working,
which is assigned to not isBroken.
So it says, okay, well,,
not is a function from Bool to Bool.
Which means that since we're
passing isBroken to not,
well isBroken must be a Bool.
So it's another form of
constraint unification.
And then because working is assigned to
the result of not isBroken and not return.
It says, okay, well working,
must also be a Bool.
Then let's say later on on
the same let expression,
we have caption = String.toUpper working.
Now it says, okay, well,
String.toUpper takes a String and
returns to a String which means
we're working must be a string.
We've concluded two facts that
are at odds with one another.
In one case, it claims that working as a
Bool, in the other case it claims working
as a string, these are contradictory
facts, this is how we get a type mismatch.
So as soon as it encounters
a contradiction like that it's like, okay,
our constraints have unified to
something that does not makes sense,
therefore type mismatch.
Now with [INAUDIBLE] types,
it's a little bit trickier than that.
It's not as straightforward.
So here are two different
append functions.
Sting.append and List.append.
Both of them do the conceptual operation
of squishing two things together.
So String.append takes
String -> String -> String.
List.append List a -> List a -> List a.
Now if I call String.append on a string
and something that's not a string, well,
it stands to reason that's going to be
a type mismatch because it says, well,
these both need to be a string.
The second thing you
gave me is not a string.
But you can't quite extend that same
pattern to parameterized types.
So here I'm appending a list
of strings to a list of a.
Now those are not exactly the same type,
but as we all sort of intuitively know,
this will still work.
It'll give us back
a which a list of string.
So how did it know to do that?
I mean, we understand how this works when
they are literally different types, but
in this case they still are literally
different types, it's just that it
figured out, okay, but these
are compatible and it put them together.
And not only did it figure
out that they're compatible,
but it concluded that it could
resolve them to a single type,
which in this case it decided it
was going to be a list string.
How did it decide list string over list a,
how does it figure those things out
differently than it figures them
out with string and float up here?
So this is the process of constraint
unification in the presence of
type parameters.
So if you have two types that are exactly
the same.Including the parameters.
They're identical types.
Okay, then it's going to unify to the same
thing because they are identical.
There's no unification
that needs to happen.
If one of them is more constrained
than another, for example,
List String is more constrained
than an unbound type.
Then it says, okay, we're gonna
go with the more constrained one.
We're gonna unify to the one that's
more constrained of the two.
And if they're incompatible,
then it says okay, type mismatch.
So let's see an example of this.
List.append a, b and c.
These two are identical, so they're going
to unify from list string to list string.
It says, okay, those unify to List String.
Let's say we do a, b, and empty list.
It says, okay, List String, List a.
Well, List String is more
constrained than List a.
So it says, okay,
those unify to List String.
The more constrained of the two.
And if we put two empty lists together,
once again, they're identical.
So of course, List a,
List a, List a, identical.
Another constraint we can have is number.
So number is a constraint that is
somewhere in-between an unbound type
variable and
a concrete variable like int or float.
So number is one of Elm's three
constrained type variables.
So number means this is either an int or
a float.
The other two constrained type variables
are appendable and comparable.
So appendable means it's
either a Strings or lists, and
comparable means it's a int, list, sorry,
int, float, there's a list of these.
String, if you ever get a mis-match on
trying to put a non-comparable thing into
a dictionary, you'll see that
error message, and it lists,
there's like seven of them.
Regardless, they are more
constrained than your typical
unbound type variable or
your concrete parametrized type.
But when they're identical,
they work out the same way.
If we have 1, 2 and 3, so
just from this list literal,
we know that this is a list of numbers.
But Elm, just based on this syntax alone,
if we just put this directly into Elm
REPL, it doesn't know if these are ints or
floats yet,
we haven't given it enough information.
A literal starts out as a number, and
then it might get more specific later,
depending on how it's used.
But at first,
it's nothing more than a number.
Okay, we can also append a list of number
to a list of unbound type variable.
And that unifies to number because
number is more constrained
than unbound type variable.
So although we still have a type
variable in here, it's not concrete yet.
When you unify these two, you still do get
something that is more constrained than
what you started out with on
one side of the expression.
>> Richard Feldman: Now if you unify
a number with a float, now okay it
says the more constrained of the two
is float, so now we unify it to float.
Okay,
>> Richard Feldman: We can still get type
mismatches when it comes to number.
So remember when we did a list
of a with a list of string,
that unified successfully
the list of string.
The problem is number is
not compatible with string.
So even though this is a type variable,
it is constrained and
it's constraint does not support String.
Which means that if you try to unify
a List String with a List number,
you'll get a type mismatch.
But List String with List of unbound,
totally fine.
Questions about that before
we move on to records?
>> Speaker 2: So I guess for a number,
it follows the pattern of
lowercase as a type variable.
>> Richard Feldman: Right.
>> Speaker 2: This is kind of
like a built in Elm thing.
>> Richard Feldman: Yes.
>> Speaker 2: It's variable
because it can be multiple things,
but there is a pre-described meaning
to the domain of those variables?
>> Richard Feldman: Yes, exactly, so the
reason for the syntactic choice of having
it look like a type variable is that in
all ways it behaves like a type variable,
except for the extra constraint.
So for example, you can choose the name,
it just has to start with number.
You can put number a, number b, number
c if you wanna have multiples of them,
it gets replaced by a more concrete type
such as float if it's unified with one.
So in most ways it behaves like one,
except for
the additional constraint
that it has baked in.
Some languages have these, and
they have a different syntax for them.
So there's a lot of trade-offs in language
design, and so the choice here was just to
go with looks the same as a type variable,
but has some extra properties to it.
>> Speaker 3: So in comparison to if it
was a custom type where you would now
have to be able to handle like adding in-
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah,
so there is a, conceivably a way you
can do that with phantom types but
that's a tangents [LAUGH].
There are other possible designs for this.
But the important thing is the way that
the constraints work out is that you can
have something that represents
either an int or a float and
they don't unify with strings, but
they do unify with ints and floats, and
they unify to the more
constraint of the two.
Yeah, there's a lot of bikeshedding
around [LAUGH] how to do constraints,
syntactically or otherwise.